So tell me a little bit about animal vitality.
Animal vitality.
Well, this is a quality possessed in large measure by my, I wouldn't say hero, but... Air Pro 2L.
Oh, something's coming through.
Certainly it's a quality possessed in...
in great quantity by the lover in my novel.
Do we have quotes around the lover?
I don't think we need quotes.
I think this is a man who genuinely does love Stella, but of course he's a very disturbed man and suffers from morbid jealousy.
paranoid psychosis that makes his relationships with women extremely difficult.
Is it necessary that he be an artist?
It's necessary for what I wanted to do in the novel.
What I wanted to suggest was that here was a woman
who is being defined for us by the psychiatrist into whose hands she falls later in the novel.
And he is telling us what her experience means.
And I wanted to contrast with the psychiatrist a madman who also wanted to tell us who Stella is and what she's really like.
And so it was necessary that he be an artist in order he too be working on his version of Stella.
So they're both artists in a sense.
In a sense they both are.
They're both attempting to give us a true representation of this rather enigmatic woman.
And of course we both have different views.
They both have different views.
Are you familiar with Margaret Atwood's new novel, Alias Grace?
I haven't read it.
But you're aware, of course, that we also have an asylum as the central setting.
Of course, in your fiction, it just seems to be the central metaphor, isn't it?
In my fiction generally?
Well, thus far.
Well, yes, I seem to gravitate to forms of madness in almost all my books.
I am very interested in what happens when the mind's ability to make proper sense of reality
when that, uh, when that ability begins to, to, to crangle, um, and when reality no longer conforms to, to a character's, uh, attempt to, to give it some sort of order and shape, um, and how people then, um, you know, flail about and, and, um,
make peculiar mental arrangements with themselves and with the outside world in order to try and sustain some sort of sense of order in the world.
And that's been a persistent
theme, the central theme of mine.
You know, I'm out in Worcester, where we have, I think, the first insane asylum in the United States.
It's a very famous, and of course, that's what it was called, an insane asylum.
And we have all kinds of different concepts of what mental illness is today, don't we?
Which I guess is why you picked a specific time for the setting of this.
That was...
More because I wanted the woman's position in society to be more constricted than perhaps it would be today.
I wanted Stella to be somewhat trapped in her rather loveless marriage and to be very limited in the sort of resources she had for finding a better life.
So I thought if I just pitch it back in 59...
that is a moment at which it would be very difficult to say, well, why didn't she get a life, get a job, take a lover, move to London?
Things would have been much more difficult for a woman.
But also I think attitudes of what mental illness is and was and how it's treated, they have changed, don't you think?
Yeah, very much so.
I wonder if this guy would be a trustee today, for instance.
It's doubtful.
He may well be incarcerated today, as he was then, but I think certainly at that time, there was only one real response to the mentally ill, which was to put him in those big Victorian institutions and lock the door.
Would he be far more heavily medicated today, do you think?
Do you know, I think he would present a real problem to...
psychiatry today because he was a man who was basically functioning normally or above normal in almost every area of his life.
It was only when he became involved with a woman that the trouble began.
It's like the alcoholic I met for a drink, isn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
And so, I mean...
It would be very difficult to allow this man to go back on the street.
You'd need to be keeping a very, very close eye on him, I think.
And the minute that he did begin to form a relationship with a woman, you'd, you know, certainly a lot of alarm would have to go off.
Now, when you started thinking about this particular novel, I know certainly something about the fact that I guess you have a history, a personal history of growing up in such a place.
Is that correct?
Yeah, that's right.
Rawmore is the biggest of the top security asylums in England.
My father was appointed medical superintendent in 1956.
and my family lived there for the next 25 years very very close to the to the hospital itself wow so i grew up very much so how old were you during your years i was six years old then um and um you know my my parents were still there when i left home did you know any uh were they patients or inmates patients yep patients yeah the the uh
By this point, it had become a hospital rather than an asylum, and the inmates were patients.
So a medical model was employed.
Is there any kind of a commentary here on your part?
Do you have an attitude on the Freudian approach at all?
I wonder...
Out of attitudes in the profession, I would expect they would be dramatically different, you know, in 59 than they might be today.
And I'm wondering, you know, if you weigh in at all on this particular... I don't know that I weigh in particularly on, you know, psychiatric paradigms.
I've always found Freud to be very useful, very suggestive.
as a writer on the mind.
I'm not sure that I have a little axe to grind in terms of different forms of psychiatric treatment.
What I did want to get at in this book was to point out that psychiatrists carry
real social power and... Real what kind of power, sorry?
Social power.
They're able to control how we, how other people are defined, how they're categorized, how they're diagnosed, and whether or not they should be allowed to have their freedom or not.
So a psychiatrist has, within his power, the ability to rob somebody of their liberty.
And I wanted to say that while we...
We will trust that psychiatrists don't abuse this power.
We can't be certain that they don't abuse it.
And we must beware of any profession that has this power at their disposal.
But, of course, when you think of a criminally insane and whether you're robbing somebody of their freedom, I mean, you're a murderer, after all.
I mean... Well, it's true.
And your narrator is even thinking after five years, well, maybe he can go home now.
Well, let's give him another five.
There's always, I think, a question.
If I keep this man locked up, then the public is protected from him.
But is there a point at which it's simply cruel to keep a man locked up?
Don't we want some sort of...
Psychiatric policy whereby we can allow people to return to real life, to life in society before they become institutionalized, before it becomes too late for them ever to return to society.
And isn't there always some risk involved in society?
allowing somebody who has been violent while insane.
Look at this case that's just in the news today and yesterday, this fellow in California.
Have you been following the news?
Well, I'm on the road, so I've been... This fellow who was a rapist and cut off a woman's arms, right?
No, I haven't... And they released him after eight years, and they just arrested him in Florida, and he did the same thing.
I mean, it's...
I mean, you could argue, you know, the guy should never be let out again.
Or you might argue, you know, that what broke down here was sort of surveillance that he should have been under, you know, after he'd been released.
Or he should have been released maybe to a medium security institution.
You know, it's some of the reviews that I've read that suggested that you write these Gothic novels.
Do you agree with that?
I think so.
I mean, as I said to you, I'm most interested in forms of madness.
And I think, you know, that's certainly a Gothic theme.
And I'm very fond of Gothic fiction, so I don't have any problem with that label.
In fact, you know, I'm...
I'd be proud to be put in a tradition that includes people like Oscar Wilde and Robert Louis Stevenson, Bram Stoker, Emily Brontë.
It's a distinguished... Sure is.
Well, is it a genre in your view?
I'd say so.
And if so, then are there various conventions that one must abide?
I'd say that
What tends always to be foregrounded in Gothic fiction are a small group of themes, and I'd call those, I'd say that those are transgression, decay, and the double.
I'd say that work that counts as Gothic will
have at its sort of thematic center one or all of those ideas.
That's what Gothic fiction is interested in.
Are you interested in either deeper human truths here that one is probing, or are we looking at the, is this kind of like a Frankenstein monster kind of a thing where we're looking, or Jekyll and Hyde type of a thing where we're...
Are we looking at level, you know, you know what I'm saying here.
In the Gothic in general, I think what we're able to do is to explore those darker, more extreme areas of human experience, human consciousness, that we tend not to want to probe too deeply at.
And the Gothic is, you know, tends to be rather sort of unafraid of going into the unconscious, discovering, you know, the darker impulses, you know, what Freud would call them the id, you know.
the Gothic is interested in sort of dream symbolism.
I'd say the Gothic takes the unconscious, you know, seriously and wants to demonstrate how it sort of permeates through into daily life.
Now, this is about four, I think, for you.
Is that right?
This is number five.
Yeah.
And maybe if you could describe the creative process here.
Do we start with Stella?
Do we start with a theme?
Do you start with the narrator being a doctor?
I'm just curious.
My process has...
is generally to start off with a story.
And in this case, the story started with simply the idea of a love triangle, but not an ordinary love triangle, one that has at its center psychiatrist's wife, Stella, and then the lover as the patient, the artist, and the husband as the doctor, the psychiatrist,
so that the tension between husband and lover is much more intense and pronounced than it is in your standard love triangle.
And with that idea, a story immediately began to unravel in my imagination.
And so I scribbled it down, wrote a first draft,
And then this again is something I've learned to do now.
When I get a second draft, I choose one of the characters and give that character the job of narrating the story.
Well, in this case, was the narrator part of the story?
He was very peripheral to the story in the first draft.
He was just one of the psychiatrists that worked in the hospital.
And then when I'd written the whole thing out, I began to see the possibilities of giving Peter Cleave the job of narrating the story.
And I began to see what I could make of that.
And did you see him taking on a stronger role at that point, too?
Yes.
Although I wanted to...
first of all, give the reader the sense that this man was reliable, was telling the truth, was compassionate, wise, a sound professional who understood the people he was dealing with, and then very slowly sow seeds of doubt as to this man's reliability.
Do you see anything cathartic here at all?
Or is it mainly... I'm not sure, but...
I think there's something cathartic in the sense that Stella is a woman who doesn't turn back, who sort of keeps on, you know, who goes regardless of everything that she loses along the way.
She doesn't ever doubt that, you know, she is right to...
give priority to this I mean she has no choice she feels her heart leads her on and even where it's clear that she's going to lose everything in the process it's going to cost her everything this love affair she still doesn't hesitate at all and of course she pays the ultimate price for this and I think there's something cathartic there if you do sort of identify and sell her and then say you know
Yes, it doesn't matter.
The world is well lost for love.
There is this sort of cathartic outcome.
What were some of the other narrative possibilities?
The first draft was written from Stella's point of view.
And I thought for a long time that I might leave it.
You know, I might give her her own story.
It had occurred to me that her husband could tell the story, even that her son could tell the story.
but somehow Peter Klee's, you know, claim upon this story was the strongest.
I mean, there's the degree of detachment on the one hand, and yet the professional and the knowledge of the characters, too, I suppose, that gives... Of course, I read something that you're working on a novel about a giant now, I guess.
Yeah, it's an 18th century novel about...
A doctor in London who becomes obsessed with a giant that is showing himself in taverns around the town.
And the doctor begins to sort of lust after the giant's bones.
He wants his skeleton, a museum of anatomy.
And so he has this very peculiar relationship by this rather pathetic...
deformed creature, the giant, and a doctor who's probably not unlike Peter Cleave, a rather cold and obsessive sort of man.
But I'm really, you know, it's early days for that one.
Are you a visual writer?
I mean, do you see these things?
I do like to see them.
And I feel that I ought to, you know, show the reader what things look like.
So I do tend to do a lot of research and try and imagine as visually as possible.
I mean, there is a cinematic quality to it, I think, as well.
I don't think it would be that hard to transform these stories into films.
And I guess one of them is, in fact, being... Yeah, the first novel, The Grotesque, was filmed and is opening in early March.
And did you write the screenplay for that?
Yes.
And that's quite an interesting exercise, isn't it?
It was very tricky with this particular novel because it's narrated by a man who's paralyzed in a wheelchair.
He's a vegetable, everybody thinks.
So the whole novel basically takes place in his head.
And this, of course, is not very cinematic.
So I had to basically sort of take it out of his head and organize a chronological timeline.
I'm not going to ask you about the biographical details.
I have that.
I'm sure that hasn't changed from what I've read.
No, I shouldn't think so.
So there is a lot of background information I have to draw.
And I think I've got some pretty good quotes here.
So I think I'll let you go have your dinner.
Well, thank you very much.
And I appreciate the chat.
Listen, my great pleasure.
I appreciate that you, you know, take it.
Well, I'm sorry I couldn't get into town to see you, but I'm sure there'll be another opportunity.
I hope so.
Great.
Well, good luck.
Thank you very much indeed.
Nice talking to you.
Me too.
Good night.
Bye-bye.